---
layout: post
title: Historical Archaeology of the Irish Diaspora: A Transnational Approach
---

[Historical Archaeology of the Irish Diaspora](/images/historical_archaeology_of_the_irish_diaspora.jpg)

Anthropologist Brighton (Maryland) offers a historical archaeological investigation of the diaspora of Ireland, reflecting the migration of Irish immigrants to the US during a turbulent period in Irish history from the mid-1840s to the 1850s. Brighton's work is the first to offer a study through an archaeological lens connecting Irish communities spanning two continents and covering four sites. He  details the archaeological research connected with excavations at two pre-Famine sites in County Roscommon, Ireland, and with several immigrant tenements located in the Five Points, Manhattan, and the Dublin section of nearby Paterson, New Jersey. Using this transnational approach to link artifacts and ceramics found in rural Ireland with those discovered in sites in the urban, northeastern United States, Brighton also employs contemporary diaspora studies to illustrate how various factions sustained a distinct homeland connection even as the Irish were first alienated from, and then gradually incorporated into, American society. With more than forty million Americans claiming Irish ancestry, fully understanding Ireland's traumatic history and its impact on the growth of the United States remains a vital task for researchers on both sides of the Atlantic. Brighton's study of lived experience follows a fascinating historical path that will aid scholars in a variety of disciplines.

An in-depth review written by Deborah L. Rotman of the University of Notre Dame for the Midwest Archaeological Conference follows after the break.

<!--more-->

Stephan A. Brighton combines archaeological and historical evidence to explore the Irish Diaspora in America. He employs comparitive data sets from Ballykilcline, County Roscommon, Ireland as well as the Five Points neighborhood in Manhattan, New York, and the Dublin section of Paterson, New Jersey. The primary material classes of his study included refined earthenwares, glass medicine bottles, and tobacco pipe bowls.

The book is divided into six chapters, each of which addresses a particular aspect of his overall project. Brighton begins by positioning his work within the context of historical archaeological studies of the Irish diaspora. He discusses the ways in which identity, particularly ethnicity, have been addressed in previous analyses of Irish-America. Brighton emphasizes how meaning is constructed, the role of the ideologies of modern capitalism in racializing Irish immigrants, and the relevance of their Old World histories in shaping their New World experiences.

Brighton proceeds by critically analyzing the term diaspora and cogently summarizing the relevant literature. He highlights the tremendous variation in the social, political, cultural, religious, and economic circumstances that have shaped Irish emigration over time. By underscoring the range of variability in the focus contributing to the displacement of peoples within the Irish diaspora, Brighton adds texture and dimension to understanding the ways in which immigrants were alienated from or incorporated into their new communities. Shared memory, stigmas and stereotypes, and transnational connections to Ireland served to reinforce collective life within the diaspora and contributed to identity formation. Brighton also stresses life cycle, age, gender, socioeconomic class, length of time in America, marital status, and other social dimensions as important factors in shaping the lived experiences of Irish immigratns in the United States—emphasizing the tremendous diversity of the Irish diaspora. The theoretical framework in this chapter is one of the most significant aspects of this volume.

Next, the author moves from theoretical discourse to a specific engagement with the Irish diaspora and its unique historical trajectories. Brighton summarizes germane historical events, including legislation that marginalized Irish peoples in their homeland, creating structures of unequal social power in Ireland and America. In sound archaeological practice, he elaborates the contexts from which people came as well as those into which they arrived. The transnational perspective which organizes this volume—that is, seeking to understand emigration and immigration from both sides of the Atlantic—makes an important contribution to the scholarly literature not only of the Irish diaspora, but of other displaced peoples as well.

